---
cover: https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1609527769513-47abd93bae48?auto=format&fit=crop&q=80&w=1931&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=M3wxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8fA%3D%3D
author:
  name: James Johanningmeier
  avatarUrl: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/32552207?v=4
  link: https://23jjl.substack.com/
date: 2023-10-22
description: What are the main differences among the Christian faith, and who is right?
layout: article
---

# Core Beliefs Separating Confessional Lutherans from Catholics and Other Protestants

::gallery
---
  images:
  - https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1609527769513-47abd93bae48?auto=format&fit=crop&q=80&w=1931&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=M3wxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8fA%3D%3D
---
::

- **What separates different bodies of Christendom from each other?**
  - There are generally three main groups for the main controversies among Christendom - the Catholic churches (Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy), the Reformed churches (mainline protestant denominations such as Baptists, Methodists, and even liberal Lutherans), and the confessional Lutheran churches.
  - The overall branch of Lutheranism is messy and in itself lumps liberals, moderates, and confessionals/conservatives together. Liberal and moderate denominations such as the ELCA, NALC, and others are similar in thought concerning these core beliefs which have diverted from true Lutheranism and commonly align with the rest of mainline protestant beliefs. Confessional denominations such as the LCMS (which is mostly confessional), and the ELS and the WELS (unwaveringly confessional) are separate and distinct categories.
  - For the purpose of simplicity, the terms Catholic and Catholicism will represent the beliefs of Roman Catholicism. The term Reformed will represent the beliefs of mainline Baptists (the largest of the protestant denominations with respective branches of Calvinism and Arminianism). The terms Lutheran and Lutheranism will represent the beliefs of member churches of the CELC (Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference) which includes numerous international bodies including the ELS and WELS.
- **Faith**
  - **What is faith?**
    - The Oxford Dictionary has two definitions for the concept of faith: "complete trust or confidence in someone or something" and strong belief in God or in the doctrines of a religion, based on spiritual apprehension rather than proof."
    - Among the Christian community, both of these broad definitions would be considered acceptable. However, we should examine the nature of the Christian faith and answer the question, "Faith in who?"
  - **Faith in who?**
    - All Christians uphold the Triune nature of God. The Godhead comprises three persons of equal power but with different purposes. They are together with one God. The concept of the Trinity is a mystery to human nature and cannot be rationalized by the human mind. These three persons each have different works. The work associated with God the Father is that of the creator of the universe and also its sustainer and provider. The work of God the Son (Jesus Christ, the Messiah) is that of the redeemer of fallen humankind who shed his blood on the cross to atone for the sins of the world. Finally, the work of the Holy Spirit is that of a comforter and enlightener who blesses us with His gifts. While there may be differences in how different denominations view the work of each member of the Trinity, all truly Christian churches acknowledge the basic doctrine of the Trinity. ([See the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed](https://els.org/beliefs/the-three-ecumenical-creeds/){:target="_blank"}).
    - Faith in Jesus Christ is especially emphasized, which is not simply mere belief (James 2:19) but complete trust in the forgiveness of sins which He offers to all through His work on the cross. Faith is generally accepted to be what determines whether one is a Christian or not. There are different views of faith and how this salvation is appropriated by the individual among each denomination.
  - **How is salvation appropriated?**
    - Appropriation - to take something and own it for oneself.
    - Salvation is generally accepted to be appropriated through faith with various controversies and variations in beliefs among Christendom.
    - For this question, it is necessary to divide the Reformed into two respective groups, the Arminians (free will) and Calvinists (double-predestination).
    - **Beliefs**:
      - Catholicism: faith is a part of salvation, but does not solely save in and of itself. Good works are also required for salvation. God gives us grace to do these good works and He rewards us with salvation. Those who don't believe/aren't Catholic are damned. No Catholic believer is damned, but some may be sinful and have to suffer for a set time in purgatory to purge away their sins.
      - Arminianism: faith comes from within the believer by which they accept Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior and allow Him into their heart to rule over their heart and be Lord over their life. Those who do not accept Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior are damned.
      - Calvinism: faith is given to certain individuals who are predestined for salvation. Conversely, certain individuals are predestined to be damned.
      - Lutheranism: faith is a gift from God that is given to believers by the Holy Spirit. In this way, God elects or chooses people to believe in Him and follow Him. The only thing that condemns is unbelief, or deliberate refusal to listen to God's Word.
  - **Aren't the Lutheran and Calvinist beliefs the same?**
    - Historically, the Calvinists certainly have tried to suggest so. However, it is much different than most perceive. Calvinists believe that God has specifically set aside and chosen a certain group of people to be damned. This violates what Paul writes to Timothy in I Timothy 2:4 which states that "[God] wants all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth" (EHV). Therefore, Calvinism is a dangerous and false belief because it denies God's desire for all people to be saved and it doesn't allow the individual to have a certainty of their salvation. 
    - However, what makes Lutheranism different is that God does not explicitly choose people for damnation. God choosing believers does not conversely mean that He has chosen others to be damned. One might ask, why doesn't God choose all people then? In asking this, they overlook the conditions of the heart that prevent one from hearing the Word of God or repenting of their sins. It is no use if the person will not open their ears or recognize that they are a sinner in need of a Savior. If they do not hear God's Word, the Holy Spirit cannot work faith in their heart because they refuse to listen. If they do not repent of their sins or have sorrow over their sinfulness and recognize that they therefore need a Savior, they refuse the Savior because they do not need Him. If they are not sinners, they have no need for Jesus. However, with all of this, because those who will listen and repent are still spiritually dead, God must work in them to bring them back to life. For this purpose, God the Holy Spirit works through God's Word to work faith in the heart of the contrite sinner. 
    - In this way, God elects sinners to be saved in His name. Through this, the sinner can be assured that their faith does not rely on their own reason, senses, abilities, or doing. Rather, it solely relies on God and what He has done for them by creating them, sustaining them, redeeming them, and working faith within their heart. "Indeed, it is by grace you have been saved, through faith—and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of God—not by works, so that no one can boast" (Ephesians 2:8-9, EHV).
    - In Luther's words, "I believe that I cannot by my own reason or strength believe in Jesus Christ, my Lord, or come to Him; but the Holy Ghost has called me by the Gospel, enlightened me with His gifts, sanctified and kept me in the true faith; just as He calls, gathers, enlightens and sanctifies the whole Christian Church on earth and keeps it with Jesus Christ in the one true faith. In this Christian Church He daily and richly forgives me and all believers all our sins; and at the last day He will raise up me and all the dead, and will grant me and all believers in Christ eternal life. This is most certainly true" ([Explanation to the Third Article of the Apostles' Creed, Luther's Small Catechism](https://els.org/beliefs/luthers-small-catechism/part-2-the-apostles-creed/){:target="_blank"}).
  - **Examining the Catholic and Reformed Views of the Appropriation of Salvation.**
    - For the same reason as expressed in Ephesians 2:8-9, the Catholic view is wrong. It is only by grace, through faith in the Word of God that appropriates salvation for the believer. It is never by works that one is saved. Also, just because one doesn't belong to a certain denomination doesn't mean they are damned. Wherever the Gospel is preached, there are bound to be believers even if they are not being fed with the right message. While this view is not held by some Catholics, the Catholic church in Luther's time would have certainly viewed Luther and all of his fellow theologians and followers to be hell-bound. It is only because of God's grace that we are saved. We could never please God with works.
    - With this, the Arminian view is also wrong. Arminians suggest that God has given people the free will to choose Him and accept Him into their hearts as their personal Lord and Savior. However, we are dead in our trespasses and sins (Ephesians 2:1). We are unable to raise ourselves from our spiritual death just as Lazarus and Jairus' daughter could not raise themselves from physical death. For this reason, we need God to raise us from the dead through His Word, just as He commanded Lazarus to come out of the tomb and Jairus to get up. In this way, we cannot choose or accept God because we are by nature enemies of God and are unable to come to Him by our own reasons or senses.
- **The Sacraments**
  - **How many Sacraments are there?**
    - There are different views on the number of Sacraments. The Catholic church perceives it to be that there are seven different Sacraments. Some of these are simply practices of worship and are not means by which God brings salvation to believers, such as confession and holy matrimony. Others are simply unbiblical, such as extreme unction, or giving Communion to the dead. Leave it to the Catholic church to make things extremely complicated once again. Other denominations do not specifically recognize the concept of the Sacraments, even though all denominations make use of the rites which were given to us by Jesus Christ. Lutherans hold that there are two Sacraments: Baptism and Communion. Among Christendom, there are also a variety of different beliefs concerning these two rites and the doctrines surrounding them. For this, there will only be the three main groups of the Catholics, the Reformed, and the Lutherans and their respective beliefs.
  - **Baptism**
    - **What is Baptism?**
      - Baptism comes from the original Greek word "baptismos" (βαπτίσμως) which means "washing" or "cleansing." In the New Testament, it refers to a rite by which partakers of the Sacrament are washed with water and Jesus' words from Matthew 28:19 are spoken. ("In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen").
      - For Catholics, Baptism is a rite that is seen as offering salvation, mainly because it is perceived as a work.
      - For Lutherans, Baptism is a rite that offers forgiveness of sins because it is the work of the Holy Spirit through the water and the Words that work faith in the recipient's heart.
      - For the Reformed, Baptism is a symbolic rite that displays the drowning of sins and is seen as a formal, public declaration of faith. Baptism is not regarded to offer salvation because it is perceived as a work, and thus is contrary to God's Word.
    - **Who should be baptized?**
      - Jesus declares that His followers should "make disciples of all nations, baptizing them..." in the Great Commission in Matthew 28:19.
      - Lutherans, Catholics, and certain Protestant groups commonly baptize infants, but also will readily baptize adults who have not received infant baptism.
      - Most mainline Protestant groups believe that baptism is only for those of a certain age and it is generally accepted that it should be done by immersion.
      - Since there are no specifics given about how baptism should be done, except for the use of water, the Words of Christ in Matthew 28:19, and that all nations should be baptized, baptism should not be limited to certain groups of people. Since "all nations" includes those of all ages, baptism should be offered to anyone, regardless of age. Baptism does not specifically need to be done by immersion, either. These are all matters of adiaphora, which the Bible neither supports nor condemns. The only things that need to be honored are the use of water, the pronouncement of Jesus' Words, and that all people receive this gift.
    - **What is the purpose and work of Baptism?**
      - Catholicism: "Baptism is understood as the total annulment of the sins of one's past and the emergence of a totally innocent person. The newly baptized person becomes a member of the church and is incorporated into the body of Christ, thus becoming empowered to lead the life of Christ" ([Encyclopedia Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Roman-Catholicism/Baptism){:target="_blank"}). See also: [The Sacrament of Baptism: Gateway to New Life](https://www.beginningcatholic.com/baptism){:target="_blank"}.
      - Reformed (Baptist): "It symbolizes Christ's work and our cleansing through uniting us to his death, burial, and resurrection (Romans 6:3-4). In baptism, we are confessing that we have embraced this gospel message and want to be publicly identified with Christ and his people" ([Why Do Baptists Baptize?](https://fbcjax.com/first-thoughts/why-do-baptists-baptize-part-1/){:target="_blank"}).
      - Lutheranism: "Baptism is not just water, but it is the water used according to God’s command and connected with His Word," "Baptism effects forgiveness of sins, delivers from death and the devil, and gives eternal salvation to all who believe this, just as the words and promises of God declare," and "It is not the water that does these things, but the Word of God which is in and with the water, and faith which trusts this Word of God in the water. For without the Word of God the water is simply water, and no baptism; but with the Word of God it is a baptism, that is, a gracious water of life and a washing of regeneration in the Holy Spirit, as St. Paul says, Titus 3:5-8: 'According to His mercy He saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit, whom He poured out on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior; that having been justified by His grace, we should become heirs according to the hope of eternal life. This is a faithful saying'" ([Baptism, Luther's Small Catechism](https://els.org/beliefs/luthers-small-catechism/part-4-baptism/){:target="_blank"}).
    - The idea that Baptism saves draws upon various references from Scripture, but perhaps the clearest passage concerning this doctrine is from 1 Peter 3:21. Prior to this verse, Peter draws a comparison to how God used water to save Noah and his family in the flood (remember, the Ark itself would have been useless without the water - God used what destroyed all other life to save the line of the Savior, water - the most abundant resource on Earth). Then, Peter states, "And corresponding to that, baptism **now saves you**—not the removal of dirt from the body but the guarantee of a good conscience before God through the resurrection of Jesus Christ" (EHV). This passage clearly expresses the purpose of Baptism, as also expressed and expounded by Luther (as quoted above) in his Small Catechism. Baptism is by no means a work, and quite the opposite as it shows how God fully works through the power of the water and the visible sign of the water.
  - **Communion**
    - **What is communion?**
      - Also referred to as Holy Communion, the Lord's Supper, the Sacrament of the Altar, or, by the Catholic Church, the Eucharist or Mass. This meal was instituted by Jesus before the twelve disciples during the night before He was betrayed. The Words of Jesus' institution of this meal are found in Matthew 26:26-30 (as well as in the other synoptic Gospels and Paul's first letter to the Corinthians.
    - **Who should commune and what age should they be?**
      - Catholics allow all members of the church over the age of 7-8 years old to partake in Mass or the Eucharist when they are considered to be at an age of reason. The Catholic church observes closed communion which means they only allow members of the church to commune with them at their services.
      - Among Reformed groups, generally, those above 10 years old are able to commune after either being baptized or going through some sort of instruction.
      - Lutherans do not allow members to commune until they have gone through confirmation instruction which prepares the student for the proper and correct reception of the Sacrament of the Altar (See 1 Corinthians 11:29). Students in confirmation are also instructed in the doctrines of the Lutheran church by studying an explanation to Martin Luther's Small Catechism and some sort of Bible History. Confirmation consists of two years of instruction which is commonly performed from the ages of around 12-13 years old. Sometimes pastors allow earlier instruction depending on the circumstances.
    - **What is the purpose of communion?**
      - Catholicism: "The Mass, or celebration of the Eucharist, is the fundamental liturgical ritual in the Roman Catholic Church. It is the central action and aspect of our lives of faith and the primary way in which Catholics worship God as a community. The word “Mass” comes from the Latin word ‘missa’ meaning ‘mission’ or ‘sending’ because its purpose is to send forth the faithful to bring forth the Good News of Jesus, and to be His presence in the world. It is also a time to give God thanks and praise, as the word ‘Eucharist’ means thanksgiving. Participation in the gift of the Eucharist is said to feed, transform, and heal us in our spiritual journey. We are empowered to go forth, and minister as Jesus did in our daily lives." ([Why is Mass Important to Catholics?](https://santamaria.wa.edu.au/why-is-mass-important-to-catholics/){:target="_blank"})
      - Reformed: "It is not that he comes in the bread and wine as such, but in the church's shared action of eating bread and drinking wine with each other. In this way communion becomes a means of grace, a way in which God's grace is communicated to the people of God for their health and renewal" ([The Lord's Supper - Baptist Basics](https://www.baptist.org.uk/Publisher/File.aspx?ID=168464&view=browser#:~:text=It%20is%20not%20that%20he,for%20their%20health%20and%20renewal.){:target="_blank"}).
      - Lutheranism: "The Sacrament of the Altar is the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, under the bread and wine, instituted by Christ himself, for us Christians to eat and to drink," "The benefit which we receive from such eating and drinking is shown us by these words: “Given and shed for you for the remission of sins,” namely, that in the Sacrament forgiveness of sins, life and salvation are given us through these words. For where there is forgiveness of sins, there is also life and salvation," and "It is not the eating and drinking that does this, but the words here written: “Given and shed for you for the remission of sins.” These words, along with the eating and drinking, are the main thing in the Sacrament; and whoever believes these words has exactly what they say, namely, the forgiveness of sins" ([The Lord's Supper, Luther's Small Catechism](https://els.org/beliefs/luthers-small-catechism/part-6-the-lords-supper/)).
    - The purpose of communion is not just a mere meal in which one just drinks wine and eats bread. Everything that our Savior has instituted was done for a reason. In the Lord's Supper, we partake of the true body and true blood of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ - the same body and blood that He shed for us on the cross under the physical form of bread and wine. As Paul writes in 1 Corinthians 10:16, "The cup of blessing that we bless, is it not a communion of the blood of Christ? The bread that we break, is it not a communion of the body of Christ?" (EHV). This is truly a wonderful gift given for believers to partake in a blessed fellowship with each other and with Christ, who now dwells in the one who eats and drinks his body and blood.
    - Luther gives us the common words of institution in his [Small Catechism](https://els.org/beliefs/luthers-small-catechism/){:target="_blank"} which are used in the Lutheran liturgy (it combines the accounts of each of the synoptic Gospels and the words of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians): The holy evangelists Matthew, Mark and Luke, together with St. Paul, write thus: “Our Lord Jesus Christ, the same night in which He was betrayed, took bread; and when He had given thanks, He broke it and gave it to His disciples, saying, ‘Take, eat; this is My body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of Me.’ In the same way also He took the cup after supper, gave thanks and gave it to them, saying, Drink from it, all of you; this cup is the New Testament in My blood, which is shed for you for the remission of sins. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of Me.’” 
